---
permalink: /
title: "Welcome, I'm Rishon!! Read on to find out more about this blog"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from: 
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

Ever since I was young, I have always been fascinated by speed. Whether it was my first bike, scooter, or skateboard, if it had wheels, I went fast in it. As I grew older, I also discovered the vast world of motorsport, a collection of various racing and driving championship series from Formula 1 to Nascar to Class B Rally. But as I started high school, I began to wonder how I could transform this passion into a real career. I had always been interested in engineering, and as I thought more and more about it, I realized I could combine my passion for speed and engineering to create the next generation of transport vehicles. This all culminated in the summer of my junior year, when I built my very own electric racing go-kart capable of reaching speeds over 30mph. Check out my projects page to learn more about it. This blog is a culmination of all my research and work, including summaries of my go-kart build, my internship at Nazar Diesel, my fun blog series about Formula 1, and many more interesting tidbits. Enjoy!!  

Displaying Projects 
======
Like many engineers, I have certain projects I want to display. To do so, this site will have integrated project portfolios. These portfolios will include detailed summaries of project work, technical research and datasheets, photos and other media, and personal insights into the daily workings of the project.

Such portfolios are very important, as they can provide deep insight into what exactly I am interested in and how I approach and tackle various problems. To learn more about engineering portfolios make sure to check out this [Indeed blog](https://www.indeed.com/career-advice/career-development/what-is-portfolio-engineering). To navigate to my portfolios, simply click the portfolio navigation button at the top of the screen and select which project you would like to view.

My Research
======
I have always been someone who is constantly looking for new information. My interests are random and varied, and often lead me down wild paths. For example, my interest in geography led me to be able to name every country and its capital, my interest in the military led me on a path of restructuring my life around discipline and accountability, my interest in politics/economics led me to writing a 4000 word research paper on Rwanda, etc. Since the main focus of this page is engineering and speed, my research regarding these topics can be found under the research tab. However, for my more whimsical interests, check out my blog posts where the endless waterfall of information in my mind that is at the same time useful and useless is collected and recorded!

Experiences
------
For me, being an engineer is all about being practical. My favorite story regarding engineering is actually an excerpt from *The Scientific Blacksmith* by Mortimer E. Cooley, the founder of the Mechanical Engineering department at the University of Michigan. In it, he describes how the first class he taught in MechE had six students in it. After showing them how to light and heat up a forging furnace, he asked the students to retrieve a piece of wrought iron from a bucket of scraps in the back of the classroom. After a few minutes, the students couldn't differentiate wrought iron from the cast iron and steel in the bucket. However, when prompted, all of them could easily explain the chemical differences between the types of iron. Cooley took this as a lesson to always focus on the practical, and how engineers could take the heaps of theoretical knowledge they had and apply that to actual engineering projects. This is the reason why I believe engineering experiences to be of the utmost importance. Even with all the research and knowledge in the world, without a practical way to apply it, it is of no use. That is why I have dedicated an entire section to the engineering experiences I have taken part in, and how those experiences have turned me into a better more insightful engineer.

What The Future Holds
------
Looking forwards to the future, I have many goals and aspirations. My primary goal is to create an engineering startup. Today, we live in a world that is changing. As new technologies like mixed reality, AI, EV's, digital wallets, etc. come online, we are becoming more interconnected than ever before. Additionally, with more of the world coming online every day, we continue to become a more globalized society. In the society of the future, innovative transportation solutions will need to be implemented in order to meet consumer demand. Already companies have started to meet these needs. For example, companies like Tesla, Rivian, and Lucid are transforming the EV space. Meanwhile, SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic are finding new ways to get to space. As time moves on, such demands will only grow, and thus I hope to meet some of these demands through my own company. To do so, I need to take certain steps. First, I must receive a mechanical engineering degree from a top university in the nation. From there, I hope to work at some leading engineering companies I mentioned earlier, most notably Tesla. There, I will gain critical real world knowledge on how innovative engineering solutions are not only thought up, but also brought to market in an economical manner. Along the way, I want to use my network and connections that I will build through college and work to find a problem worth solving and people to help me solve that problem. Once I have that idea, and feel as though I have learned enough from the companies I have worked for, I plan on breaking off and starting my engineering firm. Of course, in the present moment, I have no idea what problem I may attempt to tackle, but I know my passion for engineering, speed, and business will fuel me to move forward. Whatever direction my startup takes, it will always center around the key principles of going faster, improving the human condition, and finding creative solutions to the world's toughest challenges.  

