---
layout: archive
title: "CV"
permalink: /experiences/
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /resume
---

{% include base_path %}

Nazar Diesel Internship
===========
What Was It?
------
Nazar Diesel is a small diesel engine workshop based in Jessup, PA. It is run by a close family friend, Marty Nazar. My family has been friends with the Nazars for many years, and when I was younger, I used to stay at their home when my father traveled for work. Therefore, I spent much of my childhood exploring the Nazar Diesel workshop with Mark (Marty’s son). While we were too young to work with the engines and machines that came through the shop, we spent our time exploring tools, old vehicles, and scattered parts. Further, Marty made sure to set up little projects for us, like building circuits to power LEDs or exploring the basics of magnets. Even though my family moved away, we have still kept up a close relationship with the Nazars, and I often return to their home and stop by at Nazar Diesel while there. That’s why I was extremely grateful when Marty let me know that I could spend two weeks at the shop to complete a formal internship. While there, I learned the fundamentals of engines, drivetrains, and engineering. I helped out with various projects and, along the way, picked up many useful skills. My experience was in late June and early July of 2023.  Read on to find out more!!

Daily Breakdowns
------
<h3>Day 1 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> Today was all about an intro to the shop. While I have been to the shop many times over the years, I was never there to work, so I spent most of the morning familiarizing myself with the tools, machines, and areas of the shop. The shop had fasteners, welding, wiring, metalworking, and hydraulics sections. Some of the main machines included a hydraulic crane, metal bender, TIG + MIG welders, industrial lathe, drill press, plasma cutter, car lift, etc. After finishing my exploration of the shop, we had lunch and then headed out to a local mechanic shop that Nazar Diesel (ND) was working with. Here, we examined a fire truck. Marty explained that due to a coolant leak, the engine had overheated and broken down. Using a forklift, the shop’s owner quickly offloaded some parts that ND had finished working on for the firetruck, and then I assisted in removing a radiator from the truck. The radiator would need to be cleaned and fitted with new O-rings. After arriving back at the shop, Marty demonstrated how to use hand grinders to remove the visible rust. He then instructed me to place the part into the shop’s industrial cleaner. The new O-rings would be fitted on-site because, as Marty explained, the rings expand when fitted in order to create a seal. After finishing that work, Marty showed me how to use the Bobcats outside. These machines are multipurpose industrial vehicles that can be used for tasks such as snow plowing, grass cutting, moving pallets, etc. At the shop, there are two Bobcats. The first is an older foot pedal-operated machine where the operator uses sticks to control movement and foot pedals to control the bucket of the machine. This machine was fitted with a forklift attachment, and so I practiced picking up pallets and moving them around. The second Bobcat is a newer computer-controlled version that uses stick controls for all functions. This machine was fitted with the excavating bucket attachment, and so I practiced clearing gravel and dirt. After using the Bobcats, we cleaned up the shop and headed home for the day.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> It was great to be back at the shop! Now that I was much older, it was eye-opening to explore some of the shop that had previously seemed a mystery to me and Mark. And, of course, driving the Bobcats was a super cool experience that I never expected to have the opportunity to do.
<h3>Day 2 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> Today, we mainly worked on the Chevrolet truck rebuild. This project has been ongoing for many months and is quite close to completion. Today, Marty decided to install the power brakes and steering system. All modern vehicles have hydraulic-assisted steering and brakes. The steering system senses steering input at the wheel and then uses hydraulic pressure to assist in turning the wheels. The brake system senses braking input and uses hydraulic pressure to clamp the brake caliper around the disc and stop the vehicle. The hydraulic fluid sits in a fluid reservoir. From there, a tube runs to the hydro-boost module, which boosts the pressure of the fluid. Once pressurized, the fluid sits in the hydro-boost until steering or braking input is recorded. The fluid then flows to either the steering column or brake calipers before returning to the reservoir. The fluid reservoir and hydro-boost were already installed on the vehicle, and so we worked to add all the connection tubes. I helped unbox the kit before helping with attaching the tubes, clamping them down, and adjusting them so they were arranged correctly. From there, I took some additional time to examine the truck and asked questions to better understand the different components of the vehicle. I also created a sketch of the system in my notebook. After finishing with the truck, I helped clean up the shop by putting away tools and sweeping up.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> Today was really fun. While many of the projects in the shop were job orders for clients, the truck rebuild was purely a personal project. Because of this, Marty specifically selected a truck that had unfamiliar parts and systems so that he could learn more about them. That also meant that as I helped him, he took the time to explain each part to me. Specifically, learning about power hydraulics was very informative and was my first introduction to the extensive use of hydraulics in vehicles and transportation.
<h3>Day 3 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> Today, we worked with an Ingersoll-Rand DR150 Air Compressor. This compressor is used to power heavy-duty equipment, most notably jackhammers used to break through highways and roads to access sewage and water lines. The machine was quite old and needed to be checked to make sure all the parts worked properly and there were no leaks. Standing back, I watched as Marty and the owner of the compressor, Paul, started the machine up many times, manipulating switches and checking gauges. As they worked, they explained the purpose of each action. They first examined the oil system to ensure it was working properly. To do so, they turned the compressor on and let it run. By monitoring the oil and fuel pressure gauges, they were able to confirm a lack of leaks. They also completed a visual inspection, showing me various parts where one might expect oil to leak if there was a leak. They then checked the wiring system to make sure the computer wasn’t throwing any fault codes. Then, they moved on to the actual compressor. They explained to me that as the machine was turned on, the motor would run at high RPMs to get the compressor up to the right amount of pressure. Once it reached that threshold, the motor would drop down to idling RPMs. To ensure this mechanism was working correctly, we powered up the machine, waited for it to come to pressure, and then released pressure. After confirming the engine re-pressurized the air, Marty and Paul were satisfied with the machine. Of course, there was some minor work to be done still, but overall, the compressor was in good shape. This task took most of the day, and along the way, I learned a lot about air compressors and how they worked. Again, I helped clean up and headed home for the day.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> Working with the air compressor taught me two important lessons. The first was the technical aspects of diesel engines. Learning how to work with oil pressure, fuel pressure, RPMs, and other engine metrics is a critical part of working with any engine. The second and more important lesson, however, was how to be thorough. While each step of the inspection process seemed quite simple, both Marty and Paul took their time. And along the way, the caught many little problems that probably would not have been caught had they not checked every aspect. Engineering isn’t a fast-paced job, and learning to be patient and thorough is something I will be sure to use in my future endeavors.
<h3>Day 4 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> Today, we received two new jobs and spent most of the day bringing in the machines, ordering required parts, and examining the machines. The first job was a Quarry Drilling Rig that had some issues with oil pressure. It was a huge machine and thus was delivered on a large truck. I helped to remove all the straps and chains holding the machine before climbing up to turn on the machine. After letting it warm up, Marty carefully drove it off the truck before parking it off to the side. Marty then took some time to go over the different parts of the rig. He explained how a chain drive rotated a set of gears. Those gears then translated power into rotational force, which spun the drill bit. The bit was then lowered and used to bore through rock in quarries. After understanding the rest of the machine, we moved on since we didn’t have any of the required parts for the work that needed to be done. The second job we received in the afternoon was a Sample Drilling Rig. This machine is used to drill samples from mining sites for analysis in a lab. The owners of the machine reported the machine was suffering from “engine knocking”. This occurs when a bearing breaks somewhere in the engine, often due to poor lubrication. The fragments of the bearing then clog the oil filter, causing a knocking sound. However, the same knocking sound can be caused by a fuel pressure problem, which is much easier to fix. The first task was to determine which it was. After running the machine, Marty could instantly tell it was a broken bearing, so he knew we would have to remove the oil filter, find the broken bearing, clean the engine, and replace the filter. Since it was near the end of the day, he decided to hold off until tomorrow. Again, I cleaned up the shop and headed home.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> With mostly administrative jobs, there wasn't much to reflect on today. I enjoyed learning about the machines we received, but there weren't any fundamental engineering lessons I learned.
<h3>Day 5 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> Today, we worked on the Sample Drilling Rig from yesterday. In the morning, Marty showed me how to run some more diagnostics on the machine. After the inspection, I helped to remove the oil filter from the rig. Later, Marty used a mechanized saw to cut the filer open and spread out the inner material. He showed me the bits of metal dispersed throughout the filter, confirming that a bearing had broken. We then used a magnet to confirm what metal we were looking at before moving back to the rig to find the source of the problem. To do so, we needed to remove the engine from the rig and set it up on an engine mount inside the shop. Marty told me that he and Pat (the other employee at the shop) would actually take apart the engine later when they had finished some of the other projects in the shop. However, he did show me how to remove the engine from the rig. After it had been removed, he used the forklift to move it into the shop and then bolted it onto an engine mount. I then inspected the engine while asking Marty questions about each of the components and what they did. After that, it was clean-up time, and we headed home.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> Today, I learned about root cause analysis. RCA is exactly what it sounds like—finding the root cause of a problem in order to find the appropriate solution. From prior knowledge, Marty knew that in the case of the sampling rig, RCA would be done by removing the filter, cutting it open, and inspecting the inside. Then, the engine would have to be taken apart to find the damaged bearing. However, he explained to me that not all problems had such a clear path. In that case, he told me that to conduct RCA, you needed to move one step at a time, creating a plan for only the next step based on the information you already had. That way, you could slowly probe your way through a problem and find the root cause. RCA has many practical applications in engineering, and knowing how to effectively conduct RCA will be a useful tool moving forward.
<h3>Day 6 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> Today, we took delivery of a Doosan XP375WJD Industrial Air Compressor. This compressor was also made by Ingersoll Rand in partnership with Doosan. Marty first explained to me the naming system for the machine. He explained that the XP meant “extra pressure”, while the 375 stood for the PSI the machine outputted, and the WJD meant that the compressor had a John Deere engine in it. We then looked to see what the issue was with the machine. The customer had told us the machine was not starting properly, so Pat (an electronics expert) immediately suspected a problem with the starter circuit. This is the circuit that delivers power to the main circuit when the machine is started up. It consists of a key switch, several relays, and a controller. We first began by testing the voltage at the key switch using a voltmeter. After determining there was no voltage, I helped Pat replace the switch and try starting the compressor again. Unfortunately, that didn’t solve our problem, and we moved on to the relays. There were three independent relays that needed to be tested, and Marty and Pat tasked me with finding and testing them. I quickly found and tested two of them, confirming they were working. However, the third one was exceptionally difficult to find. I couldn’t use the wires originating from the controller because there were dozens of wires packed into a bundle with no way to separate them. However, after some searching, I managed to find the relay and tested it as well. Seeing all was well, Pat suggested we move to the controller. The controller was displaying a fault code, but we didn’t have access to a manual with which to check what the code meant. We couldn’t find the manual on Doosan’s website, so we called a local dealer to see if they had a manual. They said they would send it over; however, after waiting for some time, they still hadn’t sent it over. In the meantime, I continued inspecting the compressor and asked questions. By the end of  the day, the dealer still hadn’t sent us the manual, and we decided to head home.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> Today was quite frustrating. While I was able to learn a lot by working with the compressor’s electronics, I found it frustrating not to have an answer by the end of the day. Sensing my disappointment, Marty explained to me how this was a common occurrence. Parts didn't arrive on time, information was hard to find, etc. No problem was ever easy to solve, no matter how simple. Further, there was always going to be a lack of available information, it will always be up to the engineer to make some judgment calls on their own. This lesson was extremely important and certainly made me feel better about not solving the problem right away. Update - According to Marty, the dealer sent the manual a few days after my internship was complete, and after analyzing the fault code, the issue ended up being a problem with the controller itself. Thus, the entire system had to be replaced in order for the machine to work.

<h3>Day 7 + 8 -</h3> 
<b>What We Did -</b> Both of these days were spent doing similar things, so I have decided to combine them. Today, we went back to work on the fire engine from Day 1. With a full engine rebuild ongoing, I watched as Marty and Pat went to work. Over the two days, they worked on the cooling system, oil system, and fuel injection system. Since it was very complicated work, I mostly stood back, handing them tools and asking plenty of questions. I learned a lot of interesting facts, like how a fuel governor works or how fuel injectors can explode if water gets into the fuel system due to being heated up at high pressure and turning into steam. Both days were extremely informative, and while I didn’t do much hands-on work, I thoroughly enjoyed myself.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> Wow!! I never expected building an engine would be so complex. For the seemingly simple task of moving a hunk of metal, the engine had a surprising number of parts. It really opened my eyes to the sheer complexity of working with vehicles and engineering in general. Asking questions and learning about new parts only made me more excited to continue exploring as I move forward!
<h3>Day 9 + 10 -</h3>
<b>What We Did -</b> With a lack of necessary parts, Marty decided to use the final two days of my internship to show me the “dark side” of engineering. Over the course of the previous three months, the shop had become extremely cluttered. So Marty, Pat, and I spent both days working through each section of the shop. We threw out unneeded items, swept the floors, organized tool cabinets, and sorted parts. We also rearranged the large shelf of fasteners and relabeled the entire shelf.

<b>Daily Reflection -</b> I think that many people, including myself, have a perception that engineering is all about creating high-tech solutions and doing groundbreaking work every second you are in the office. But the cleaning during days nine and ten, and more broadly the entire internship, showed me that mundane tasks are still just as important as they were one hundred years ago. Workspaces still need to be cleaned, emails need to be sent, parts need to be ordered, etc. The engineering tasks of today and tomorrow are difficult not only because of their incredible complexity but also because of the increasing number of mundane and foundational tasks that must be seamlessly coordinated. Learning to appreciate this “dark side” of engineering was a valuable lesson.