---
title: 'The Engineering of F1 - Why Red Bull is so Dominant in 2023'
date: 2023-07-10
permalink: /posts/TEOF1-why-red-bull-is-so-dominant-in-2023/
tags:
  - TEOF1
  - Engineering
  - Racing
  - Formula One
---

Welcome to my new series on the engineering of F1. Read on to explore more about what I hope to achieve.

What is TEOF1?
======
While Formula One is all about fast cars and skilled drivers, there is a deeper less understood world that exists below the surface. And no it's not some magical or mysterious thing, it's the engineering behind F1. In this series of blog posts, I want to explore various engineering based concepts, like how F1 cars work, how teams are implementing new techniques, and what makes a car fast. I hope you enjoy this series!!

Red Bull Gives You Wings....Looks Like Max Verstappen has Been Drinking a Lot of It
------
Following the highly controversial 2021 F1 season where Max Verstappen barely beat Lewis Hamilton in the season finale at Yas Marina, everyone looked towards the new regulations coming to F1. The biggest regulation change since the start of the turbo-hybrid era which Mercedes dominated, the new rules completely changed the cars, making them bigger and heavier, and promising better following. If ever there was a time to proverbially and literally overtake Mercedes, it was the 2022 season. And in the end, Mercedes 'spun out' all on their own and completely fumbled the bag with the new regulations. After the season opener in Bahrain, it looked like Ferrari were going to be the dominant team with Red Bull chasing behind. But as the season wore on, it quickly became clear that Ferrari had a long ways to go in terms of strategy, and the Red Bull duo of Max Verstappen and Sergio Perez began collecting 1-2's like they were picking up cases of Red Bull's from the grocery store. In the end, Verstappen easily won the championship well before the season ender, with Charles Leclerc of Ferrari barely edging out Perez for second in the championship thanks to his earlier wins in the season. But as the 2023 season began, even Ferrari fell behind. From the very first race Verstappen blazed his way to victory by 12 seconds. Next was Perez who had a 26 second gap to third place Fernando Alonso of Aston Martin (I was absolutely pumped for Alonso, easily my favorite driver on the whole grid). The Red Bull duo then traded wins back and forth for the next few races before Verstappen blazed ahead, winning 6 grand prix in a row starting in Miami until the latest race in Britain. He is only three races away from tying Sebastian Vettel's record of 9 race wins in a row, which he would accomplish at his home grand prix in the Netherlands. No one else this season has even come close to winning a Grand Prix, the closest being two tenths of a second at the Australian GP but only because of a late safety car restart. But why has Red Bull's car been so dominant, and how has the team's lead designer Adrian Newey done it?

The Most Complicated Floor You Will Ever See
----
The biggest advantage Red Bull has is their floor. The floor of an F1 car is essentially a giant downforce generator. It keeps the car stuck to the ground, and allows drivers to take corners more quickly. if you have ever had the pleasure of riding in an expensive sports car like a Ferrari or Audi, you've probably marveled at how the car stays glued to the ground when taking fast corners. That is downforce at work. A F1 car generates downforce primarily through it's nose, floor, and tail/diffuser. When the car moves forward, the nose splits the air in front of it. The air that flows up along the body of the car is at a high pressure. The air that forces itself under the car through the floor is at a low pressure. This pressure difference is what makes downforce. By modifying the floor, teams can change how the downforce is created and how effective it is. The floor of every car has a forward tilt, or 'rake'. This creates an extremely low pressure zone towards the front of the car, before gradually tapering up and smoothing out the air out the back with help of the rear diffuser. You might have seen pictures of the Red Bull floor when it was lifted by crane off the track in Monaco and seen the difference in complexity compared to the floor of a team like Williams. And while many think the team has infused some unexplainable magic into their floor, I think there is a simpler explanation.

Porpoising...A Cute Sea Animal But a Hellish Racing Phenomenon
----
If you watched the beginning of the 2022 season, you saw how many teams suffered with a phenomenon known as porpoising. Similar to the animal, the car's rear end would bounce up and down. This is caused by an overload of downforce. With the 2022 cars being geared for much higher levels of downforce, the cars were sucked closer to the ground. If a team did not have their suspension perfectly setup, the car would be pulled too close to the ground. The pressure would then become too low, essentially causing the air to stall. This would release the downforce and pop the car back up. But as soon as it did so, the car would get sucked back down, creating an endless loop of bouncing that had drivers like Lewis Hamilton struggling to even walk after driving the cars. It became such a huge issue that the FIA had to step in and raise the ride height of the cars to stop such excessive porpoising. But one team that had barely any issues with porpoising was Red Bull. 

The Einstein of F1—Adrian Newey
---
It is hard to argue that Adrian Newey is not one of the greatest F1 car designers in history. With 6 drivers and 5 constructors championships under his belt with another set of each likely coming at the end of this season, he, along with Christian Horner, has turned Red Bull from a floundering and forgotten team into a powerhouse. But why is this car so special? One of the things teams have had to balance over the past two seasons has been ride height. If you can get a lower ride height, you get more downforce. But too low of a ride height, and you risk porpoising. Somehow Red Bull has managed to get their ride height lower than other teams without having to worry about porpoising. While of course there is no publicly available information regarding the car design, as such information is kept under lock and key, we have some idea as to why Red Bull might be so dominant. The biggest advantage Red Bull has is a better suspension. They have somehow found the right balance of suspension, which has allowed them to ride lower without giving up performance. This added stability to the car allows the drivers to take corners faster and more confidently, which adds up over the course of a race. Paired with a world-class engine, it's no wonder Red Bull is ahead. But there are also some other reasons why.

DRS...Domination, Red Bull, Surely
----
One of the key aspects you may have noticed when watching the Red Bull's this year is just how effective their DRS systems are. Every time the rear wing opens, it's like the car becomes a rocket ship, blasting by the opposing car like it's nothing. To me, it seems like Red Bull has been far ahead of the other teams in creating track-specific rear wings. Since every circuit demands something different from the cars, having a tailor made wing can be super helpful. Of course some of the smaller teams simply don't have the budget to make new wings for each race, but even against the larger teams like Mercedes and Ferarri, Red Bull seems dominant. It was especially clear at the Saudi arabian Grand Prix, where Red Bull came equipped with a bespoke wing fitted with only one beam wing element as compared to the other teams, who were only able to run slightly modified versions of their Bahrain GP wings. This really speaks to the organization and dominance of Red Bull and the incredible skill of Adrian Newey in balancing cost and performance.

A High Flying and Hotheaded Driver
---
Of course, no discussion of Red Bull would be complete without a discussion regarding their darling driver, Max Verstappen. While there have been questions regarding Sergio Perez's place at the team, it is undeniable that Max is currently the best driver in the world. Having a driver like that paired with an incredibly engineered car is simply a recipe for success. Overall, Red Bull have managed to combine ingenious engineering with a solid team. And it surely will lead them to yet another championship this year, and likely, barring any significant changes, their dominance will continue until the next set of regulation changes slated for 2026.

Thank You
--
I hope you enjoyed the first edition of TEOF1. I am really excited to dive into more topics over the coming weeks, and I hope you will tune in when I do!!