---
title: 'The Need for Speed'
date: 2023-07-28
permalink: /posts/the-need-for-speed/
tags:
  - Racing
  - Engineering
  - Speed
---

In this post, discover the process of how I went from driving my friend's go-kart to building and driving my very own electric racing go-kart!

The Motivation
======
As you may have learned by now, I have a serious need for speed. Perhaps, on a deeper level, speed satisfies the desire I have for thrills. As my favortie TV show character Harvey Specter once said, "Life is this (waving his hand down by his stomach as if to say down here), and I like this (placing his hand above his head to say up here)." If we don't chase what brings us the ultimate thrill in life, then what are we doing? I want to tell you about a story where I did go out and chase it, and how it changed my life forever.

The Beginning
------
It all started about a year and a half ago, when I was in ninth grade. At the time, I couldn't go anywhere due to COVID, and so me and the rest of the neighborhood kids would always gather each day after online school to pass the time playing pickleball, football, manhunt, or other games. One day, our friend Noah received an enormous package at his front door. As we went to ring his doorbell, we all wondered what it could be. Later that day, we came back and saw what was inside the box—a brand new electric go-kart. As soon as it was charged up, we all clamored for a turn, excited to zip around the streets. It was amazing, and for weeks we were obsessed with it. But for all that it was, it wasn't really that fast. If you really pushed it, you might get it to go about 15mph. And so, one day as I stepped off from riding it, I told all my friends about how I wanted to build a kart that would go even faster. They all became excited, but being the lazy person I was, I never actually got around to building it. The excuses of "It costs too much", or "It would take too long" lingered in my mind. And with the start of the tenth grade school year, I quickly forgot about it.

The Revival
------
Fast forwarding to March of my Junior year, I began to think of my plans for the upcoming summer. With college admissions quickly approaching, I knew this was my last chance to complete another interesting project/experience before being swamped by college. I had already decided to head up to my best friend's dad's diesel shop for the summer. With over 50 years of experience, I was sure to learn a lot there from him (blog post detailing the experience coming soon). As I thought of what project I might do on top of that, I remembered my proposition to the neighborhood kids all that time ago. No longer burdened by the cost or time, I thought what better project to undertake. And what a decision that turned out to be. Who knew that the simple toy go-kart my friend purchased in the summer of 2021 would lead to such life changing events?

The Planning
-----
I knew that with such a complicated project, making sure everything was planned was of the utmost importance. Planning had never been my strong suit, but I was determined to ensure the project was planned well. So I began by researching project management methods. After some research, I decided to use Agile project management, as it lent itself to the complicated and ever-changing nature of the project. Since I didn't know exactly what would need to be done, more rigid management solutions like Waterfall didn't work. Agile was perfect. After setting up my project plan into sprints and story points, I began to identify the parts of the go-kart and the necessary tools. I knew I would need a base frame, a motor, batteries, and supporting electronics. The easiest component to find was the frame. After surfing Facebook Marketplace, I finally found a great deal on a 1990 Manco gas go-kart for $450. The plan was to strip all the gas components and install the new electronic components. The next step was to determine the voltage and amperage of the system. I decided to go with a 48V 100Amp Continuous Brushed DC system. After deciding this, I first found batteries off of Amazon. I had to balance the weight and size with the capacity, and eventually settled on 4 12V 35Ah batteries from Weize. I then found all the rest of the parts for the kart. If you want to learn more about the individual components, how they work, and my process for finding them, check out my project portfolio under the portfolio tab. What was more important though was the process of finding these parts and what I learned from it. It took me many painstaking hours to ensure all the electrical components went together. There was no easy online guide to help me along the way. I really struggled at times to find the motivation to continue to look for parts. Many times I almost gave up. But then I thought back to my tendency to procrastinate, and to put off work until it was too late. I thought of the many great ideas I had over the years that never came to fruition because I was too lazy. And at that moment I knew I had to have the discipline to carry out this project to the end. Because I knew if I didn't I would regret it for the rest of my life. And so I pushed on, and finally by the end of the school year I had ordered and organized all the necessary parts. 

The Execution
------
After that, the work didn't start right away. Once school had ended, I headed up to the shop every day to work as part of the internship. I became familiar with the shop and all the available tools. Then, in July, it was finally time to get going on the kart. After 2 weeks of hard labor and some unexpected struggles along the way, the kart was finally done. If you want to read more about the build process check out the portfolios tab. As we lowered the kart from the horse benches and set it on the ground, my excitement only grew. It seems like only yesterday that I sat down and took the kart out for its first ride.

The Conclusion
-----
I sat down, jammed into a seat made for a ten-year-old. Scrunching my legs up, I rested my knees on the frame of the kart. I reached down and flicked the on/off switch. A light rain had fallen earlier, and the sweet breeze blew into the cavernous garage. I gently pressed the pedal, wondering if the kart would move at all. I heard the distinctive *click* of the contactor as the circuit completed and energized. As I pushed the pedal forward, the kart suddenly lurched forward, as if a beast ready to pounce. It was straining to be free, the power bubbling beneath the surface. I carefully rolled the kart down the gravel driveway and onto the street. I braced myself and forcefully pushed the pedal. The left tire squealed as 80 foot inches of torque were immediately applied, struggling to find purchase on the wet asphalt. And then it caught, and I felt the most exhilaration I have ever felt in my life. In a way it was odd. In all my experience with speed, this should have been nothing special. It certainly wasn't the fastest thing I had ever driven. By this time I had already taken a car to almost 135mph down a deserted back road. It wasn't the most dangerous thrill I had undertaken. I had snowboarded down black diamonds and jumped 10-foot ramps on mountain bikes before. Heck, I had even ridden professional racing go-karts that were faster than this. So if it wasn't the fastest or most dangerous thing I had ever done, why was this so exhilarating? Why did my brain feel like it was floating? The question puzzled me as I raced through the streets, weaving through sharp turns on nothing but pure racing instinct, not knowing how the kart would respond, but willing to take that risk regardless. But as I rolled the kart back into the garage, I realized what had given me that rush. It had nothing to do with the other thrills I had experienced in my life. This was unique because it was the first experience I had with something built from my own two hands. An idea that spawned in my mind years ago that finally became something real. It wasn't the thrill of speed or danger, it was the thrill of seeing something abstract take form, something that didn't exist become real. It had been bubbling inside me since I began the project, but only once I drove the kart did I truly appreciate that feeling. And it was that overwhelming feeling of pure joy that told me this was what I wanted to do for the rest of my life. Taking the crazy ideas from my head and turning them real gave me a thrill like no other. Perhaps this is what has led humans to build things for centuries. The idea of turning something that just popped into your mind one find day into something that is real and useful is such a weird concept. How does something not real become real? How does nothing become something? Whatever the answer, I had now joined a long list of humans who had discovered the joy of building. And for finding this, I am eternally grateful. It wasn't all sunshine and rainbows though. It took years of soul-searching, introspection, depression, anxiety, and hard work to find this passion. And the path forward isn't only fun from here. To achieve my dreams I have to make sacrifices and do things that are boring. I have to get a job and take care of a house. I have to write reports, and spend hours studying for tests. But at the end of the day, I found something that truly makes me happy. In a sea of endless worry, I always have a lighthouse to guide me. Most people never find that, because they aren't willing to chase what they want. They aren't willing to listen to their mind, no matter how crazy it may seem. But most of all they don't have the discipline to get what they want. Success and happiness isn't an endless stream of positivity. Getting what you want from life doesn't mean suddenly there is no negativity. Problems arise, work is hard, life is boring; but if you have the discipline to get past these things, you can look back and be satisfied with the life you lived. That is the profound lesson I learned from this project. If you are interested in learning more about the technical aspects of the project, check out the portfolios tab to find all the documentation I did. Thanks for reading, and I hope you got some real value out of this post!! 